RTS Africa Engineering’s self-cleaning inertial spin filters optimise dust filtration in transformer rooms and related spaces, and is the preferred solution in many major South African mines. RTS Africa Engineering’s self-cleaning inertial spin filters are just what mining companies require for dust filtration in MCC rooms, transformer rooms, control rooms, ‘E’ houses, VSD rooms and compressor rooms. Compact and easy to install, the spin filters solve common problems which mining companies experience with traditional dust filtration equipment, mainly inconsistent performance, and high maintenance and energy costs. How mines benefit Through smart application engineering, RTS Africa Engineering ensures that their spin filters benefit clients through lower maintenance costs, energy-efficiency and reliable performance in extremely demanding conditions, managing director at RTS Engineering Africa, Ian Fraser explains. When using RTS Inertial Spin Filters to clean air for MCC rooms, variable speed drives, control rooms, and other areas, no secondary filtration is required. This eliminates the need for expensive, complex, high-maintenance bag houses. Fraser elaborates. “Because the system is self-purging, there is no filter element that can become blocked from dust overload. Also, the spin modules are made from high-density polypropylene and are highly resistant to wear.” With the filtration principle based on highly efficient cyclone technology, the spin filter’s dust arrestance is 98% of dust particles 15μm and above. At 5μm, the modules will remove 80% of dust by particle count. Demonstrating the spin filters’ efficiency, Fraser explains: “Note that 10μm is 1/6 of the average diameter of a human hair. Even under heavy dust loads, this represents overall removal efficiency of >98% of dust loading by mass.” For applications requiring even finer dust arrestance (smaller than 3μm) – compressor intakes for instance – secondary filtration is highly recommended, Fraser adds. “In this situation, simple secondary pocket filters are cost-effective, and, due to the fact that they are only capturing very fine particles, they require very little attention, even in high dust load applications.” Another performance factor is that pressurised space in the units of 50 – 100Pa range ensures that all air flow is outwards. This prevents dust entering through gaps in cladding, and under doors for example. Sizing of the units is based on an analysis of the equipment in the relevant space. Energy efficiency is another feature that stands out. Due to the constant pressure drop and absence of secondary process air or other energy absorbing equipment, the spin filter is energy-efficient. Product range RTS has vertical (wall-mounted) and horizontal (surface-mounted) for installation. Vertical (wall-mounted) spin filter assemblies are for simple installation on VSD rooms, ‘E’ houses, and control rooms. These range from 1500Nm3/hr to 9000Nm3/hr. Horizontal (surface-mounted) spin filter assemblies are for other applications. They are specifically engineered to suit site requirements and constraints. There is no upper limit on capacity. Purpose-designed Fraser advises that RTS inertial spin filters can be purpose-designed for specific applications. The company advises on the correct solution for their particular dust problem.  Citing an example of air changes in a unit, he points out that the number of air changes per hour depends on the level of heat generation. “As few as 10 air changes per hour can suffice where there is little heat generation. Conversely, where there is heat-generating equipment installed, a higher number of air changes are recommended,” he clarifies. RTS Africa is more than adequately experienced and equipped to offer a full service – from conceptual design to on-going support to a wide variety of mining and industrial clients in South Africa, pan-Africa and beyond.