Cummins Inc. and NRG Energy of the US have announced a strategic commercial partnership to deploy a resilient, cleaner, and cost-effective distributed generation platform for commercial and industrial customers. This platform is the first-of-its-kind in the energy industry. The easy-to-implement solution gives customers the opportunity to transition to a smarter energy consumption model. The platform, with a preliminary estimate of hundreds of megawatts of capacity, or enough to power tens of thousands of homes, enhances customers’ energy usage through Cummins-powered generators and NRG-distributed generation resource capabilities. The companies estimate that the solution will save customers up to 15% on their current energy costs, and in many cases with zero enrolment expenses. In addition to providing customers with more control over their energy future, the platform is expected to reduce environmental impact and power-grid stress significantly. Furthermore, the platform architecture allows for more capacity to meet expanding market requirements. The companies note that while the formal partnership is new, they have in recent years successfully implemented distributed generation models for several customers, and are now ready to bring this proven, cost-effective solution to a wider customer base. Cummins Inc. Power Systems Business President, Norbert Nusterer, comments that the reliability of power remains critical in the overall distributed generation equation. This is a business model that leverages Cummins’ expertise in manufacturing power-generation equipment for the harshest and most demanding operating conditions. “Having deployed several hundred megawatts, and delivered strong economic returns and reliability to customers, this partnership is intended to expand on the experience we have gained. Our partnership with NRG brings together nearly 125 years of energy leadership to give more customers new ways to achieve their goals in environmental stewardship, and cost and risk reduction,” Nusterer comments. NRG Business Solutions President, Robert Gaudette, highlights that Cummins and NRG have a shared vision to deploy new technologies such as this platform to provide customers with reliable power, and assist them in navigating the increasingly complex energy market. “This is just one example of how we can continue to optimise new and existing energy technologies in order to enable customers to use less, and therefore pay less, for electricity. The power producer of tomorrow will do more than just move electrons; it will direct them where needed most, with measurable benefits for the customer, the grid, and the environment,” Gaudette concludes. Cummins Africa Middle East has regional office in South Africa, Morocco and Dubai, with branches across the territory.